Study in Italy and student work permit Mastering the Italian language and mastering a practical skill will be very helpful in finding a suitable student job . If your skills match your field of study , you will have more favorable conditions . Students usually work in Italy to cover their living expenses and gain work experience . Of course , working conditions for international students outside the European Union are difficult , just like Iranian students . They can not work more than 20 hours a week , they are not allowed to work on holidays and they can not engage in a personal profession . In the continuation of this article , we point out two important points related to student work that immigration experts at GO2TR Immigration Holding emphasize that students should be aware of before traveling : The first point The first point is that the part-time student work in Italy that international students are allowed to do usually does not cover all the expenses of student life and will only be an allowance for you . For this reason , you will need a financial support to study in Italy . The second point The second point is that you should not expect to find work immediately after arriving in Italy . It is necessary to spend your initial semesters and after familiarizing yourself with the environment , look for a suitable job . Teaching English , caring for the elderly and children , interpreting and working in some hotels are among the job opportunities in Italy for students . Also , in the summer season , many restaurants and cafes in Italian cities , especially in Rome and Milan , are looking for non-Italian employees . If you want to work as a student to cover your living expenses and gain experience , and you are looking for a job that fits your field of study , it is better to consult your university . Many research institutes , etc . in Italy entrust students with some tasks and tasks and ask universities to introduce applicants and qualified students to them .