Undergraduate studies in China The university admissions period for undergraduate studies in China is twice a year , in January and September . After completing their 12-year education in schools and receiving a diploma , students can take the necessary steps to obtain admission to a bachelor 's degree in China and enter the country 's universities . The length of the bachelor 's degree in China is 3-4 years , which depends on your field of study and your efforts . It is also possible to study in English in most fields and universities in this country , and you have to learn Chinese just to enter the job market . To study in China at the bachelor 's level , you must obtain an IELTS score of 5.5 . Master 's degree studies in China Master 's degree studies in China take between 2 and 3 years . To enroll in the master 's course in Chinese , you must have a score of 4-6 in the HSK language test . To register and study English in China , you need a minimum score of 6 in IELTS and 90 in TOEFL . The documents required to apply for admission to the master 's course in China include transcripts and documents and the average of the diploma and bachelor 's degree . Studying in China at the master 's level is done in two general ways , education-oriented and research-oriented , depending on the major of the students . Mathematics and engineering fields are more popular among master 's applicants in China than other fields . If you have presented an article or have a research or research project in mind , attach the file . Remember that the stronger your resume , the better your chances of getting accepted . PhD studies in China To study for a PhD in China , applicants must have a master 's degree in the relevant field and a B2 level English language certificate and a letter of recommendation . The curriculum at this stage is different depending on the field and university . But in general , candidates are expected to participate in exams , seminars , research and writing a thesis or dissertation . A PhD degree in China can usually take between 3 and 4 years . During the doctoral studies , it is necessary for the student to work on his research project . Each academic year in China has two semesters , spring and fall , which are spring semester from March to July and fall semester from September to January .