HELL BROKE LOOSE in Joshua Cottrill ’ s body .
He could walk off the cold sweats during the day , but over nights at the Broome County jail , he couldn ’ t breathe .
His legs and back were in pain , and insomnia kept him awake for two days straight .
Withdrawal often causes opioid users to vomit and defecate uncontrollably , but Cottrill could do neither ; he ’ d been too sick to eat for 10 days .
His peers were worried .
One incarcerated man said he warned Cottrill that he could die if he didn ’ t force himself to hold something down .
Opioid withdrawal is torturous and occasionally lethal .
The pain can be bone-deep .
It ’ s often described as the worst illness of someone ’ s life .
It ’ s also mostly preventable .
Medication for opioid use disorder — moud for short — is one of the only evidence-based treatment options shown to prevent withdrawal , relapse , and overdose .
It is widely considered the gold standard for treating opioid addiction .
Thanks to a 2021 law , New York jails are mandated to distribute it .
In an Upstate Jail , Incarcerated People Struggle to Access Promised Addiction Treatment Sam Mellins Nearly two weeks into his incarceration , Cottrill still hadn ’
t received his medication .
Already in severe withdrawal , he said “ they just keep saying I got ta wait , please be patient ” — a common refrain from Broome County prisoners waiting on the life-saving medication .
Cottrill ’ s account is one of 16 shared with New York Focus by people currently or formerly incarcerated by the Broome County Sheriff ’ s Corrections Division who had enrolled — or attempted to enroll — in the jail ’ s moud program .
Along with community advocates , academics , family members , and attorneys , they portrayed a deeply dysfunctional treatment program .
The men described an intense fear of relapsing because they can ’ t get the medication they need .
At least one has , even after starting the moud program , because his dosage was too low to stave off his symptoms .
Six other men said that their treatment isn ’ t working and that they ’ re going into withdrawal every day .
One of them pled with his jailers for months before he was able to receive medication , and only after a civil rights group intervened on his behalf .
Some may never get on the program at all .
“ I ’ m not trying to be in pain and fighting this addiction , ” said Ryan Carney , who relapsed while on the program .
“ It ’ s definitely a good program , but I don ’ t think it ’ s being ran the way it was made to be. ”
Access is so limited that some men save spit-caked , half-used doses and reconstitute them to sell to others in need .
Others try to smuggle medication into the jail .
They face disciplinary action if discovered , but they ’ re desperate enough to risk it .
“ It ’ s definitely a good program , but I don ’ t think it ’ s being ran the way it was made to be. ”
—RYAN CARNEY The man presiding over all of this says he wants the treatment program to work .
Sheriff Fred Akshar , a former New York state senator , voted for the 2021 law while in the legislature .
When he took over as sheriff , he replaced a tough-on-crime , and some local advocates hoped for a new progressive era .
Akshar touted plans to revamp the jail ’ s approach to addiction .
Nearly 10 months into the sheriff ’ s tenure , Broome County is still waiting on the transformation .
The number of incarcerated individuals on the moud program has increased from 54 to 85 this year , according to Akshar ’ s office .
But according to the men interviewed , little has changed in the two years since New York Focus first reported that people jailed in the county were unable to access medication .
That was before the jail was legally required to have the program .
Now that it ’ s mandatory , advocates said that the jail is doing the bare minimum to avoid breaking the law .
KEY POINTS People incarcerated at the Broome County jail are struggling to access medication for opioid use disorder ( MOUD ) that the jail is legally required to provide .
The men interviewed frequently suffer through mild to severe withdrawal while being denied the medicine that would eliminate their symptoms .
As a state senator , Fred Akshar voted for this law .
He 's now sheriff of Broome County , which has some of the highest rates of overdose in the state .
He 's fighting to reform a system that was never designed to support such programs .
Some men reported having to wait months to start on the MOUD program .
Many struggle even if they get in , receiving doses too low to manage their disease .
Some who have n't been able to get on the program have smuggled in medications like Suboxone .
Akshar 's office treats these medications as contraband — a practice that research suggests does more harm than good .
MOUD programs in jails and prisons have been shown to reduce overdose rates in the community .
But some men are released before they can get on Broome ’ s program , leaving them at extremely high risk for relapse and overdose .
“ What very much seems to be happening is that Broome is partially complying with moud law , but ignoring the spirit of it , ” said Antony Gemmell , an attorney with the New York Civil Liberties Union , which hailed the law as “ an opportunity to save countless lives ” when it passed and has since intervened to enforce it .
The jail “ is seemingly denying people what is necessary treatment for a life-threatening illness , ” Gemmell said , “ and that should be concerning to everyone. ”
Through a representative , Akshar said he “ respectfully but wholeheartedly ” disagreed with Gemmell ’ s assessment .
“ My administration holds a dramatically different philosophy and has taken a dramatically different approach to treatment access within the Broome County Correctional Facility than the previous administration. ”
State Assemblymember Linda Rosenthal , who sponsored the moud bill , said she would push for an investigation into how the law is being implemented .
“ We shouldn ’ t have had to pass a law for this , ” Rosenthal said .
“ But we did .
This is just the right way to approach the epidemic .
So it ’ s disturbing that , A , it ’ s not going according to the way the law specified , but B , it ’ s not the best practices route either .
It seems very slipshod and haphazard. ”
For Cottrill , the shoddy implementation meant waiting so long , his body shut down .
Cottrill ’ s withdrawal intensified until medical staff decided to intervene .
He became so sick that when he tried to walk , he passed out , falling and hitting his head on the floor , according to Cottrill and four other people who witnessed the incident .
Staff took him out in a wheelchair .
He started the moud program the next day .
EVERY MORNING around 4:30 am , the men on the program sit shoulder to shoulder .
Medical staff go around the room , handing out their medication , pre-crushed in envelopes .
They keep the powder under their tongues until it ’ s dissolved , then raise their hands .
Staff and correctional officers check their mouths with flashlights to make sure that they aren ’ t “ cheeking ” their medication — storing it to sell to their peers .
Then they go back to bed , hoping to squeeze in a few hours before they have to start the day .
For many of the men interviewed , the cravings begin around dinnertime .
Restlessness .
Headaches .
Some have physical pain , cramps , and uncontrollable muscle contractions .
One said his spasms were so bad that he was afraid of accidentally punching the wall in his cell .
If they ’ re lucky , they sleep a little before they wake up in withdrawal in the middle of the night .
4:30 am comes , and the cycle begins again .
All of the men interviewed who were able to get on the program said they were receiving between eight and 16 milligrams of Subutex a day .
( Subutex is a brand name option for buprenorphine , one of the most common forms of moud . )
While the majority were able to eventually access the moud program , they frequently reported having to wait months to get their dosages right .
“ I don ’ t feel well at all right now. ”
—NICHOLAS CLANCY
For people with advanced opioid dependence , said Justine Waldman , a doctor of addiction medicine and ceo of the reach Project , “ eight milligrams of Subutex is not going to touch them , ” especially considering the prevalence of fentanyl and the strength of opioids now available .
The prisoners agree .
While some reported doing well on the program , many said that the doses aren ’ t enough to prevent them from getting sick every night .
“ I take my medication at four o ’ clock in the morning .
By four o ’ clock in the afternoon , like right now , I don ’ t feel well , ” said Nicholas Clancy .
He was clammy , aggravated , and in pain .
“ I don ’ t feel well at all right now. ”
Joshua Lee , an addiction medicine doctor who has studied medication programs in New York City ’ s jails , said that Broome appeared to be doing what it could under the circumstances.
“ If they do have ready access to eight to 16 milligrams of buprenorphine , it ’ s hard to accuse Broome County jail of not offering adequate moud treatment , at least with buprenorphine. ”
New York Mandates Peer Support in Jails , But Lets Sheriffs Keep Peers Out
Spencer Norris
Yet that doesn ’ t necessarily equate to great care .
Most of the men reported being switched from one medication to another without their consultation .
Some , including Cottrill , said they were on methadone before they were incarcerated but got switched to Subutex in jail — which can be especially brutal .
“ That can totally fuck people up , ” Lee said .
“ You can have these withdrawal symptoms long-term. ”
That ’ s if they can get on the program at all .
The sheriff ’ s office said that incarcerated individuals are automatically enrolled in the program if they tell staff that they have used opioids when they enter the jail .
But multiple men said they had to fight for months to get access and provide some kind of proof that they needed the medication .
Justin Knapp told staff that he was headed for a relapse and submitted five requests to be put on the moud program .
He shared the slips and communications from the jail ’ s healthcare contractor with New York Focus .
“ I would like to speak to Dr .
Boot about the M.A.T .
program , ” Knapp wrote on one request ( moud is often called ‘ medication-assisted treatment ’ , or mat ) .
“ I ’ ve been craving heroin
and I don ’ t want to use
but I am an addict who given the oppertunity [ sic ] will use heroin
and I don ’ t want to die from heroin overdose. ”
“ I ’ ve been craving heroin
and I don ’ t want to use
but I am an addict who given the oppertunity will use heroin
and I don ’ t want to die from heroin overdose. ”
—JUSTIN KNAPP He was denied over and over again .
Months went by , and he still couldn ’ t get the medication he was begging for .
Knapp eventually filed a grievance demanding access .
The jail ’ s response was short and to the point .
“ Your grievance denied as non grievable , ” it read .
“ Your failure to qualify for the program proves a lack of medical necessity. ”
Gemmell ’ s team at the nyclu stepped in and sent a series of letters to the Broome County Sheriff ’ s
Office demanding that the jail evaluate Knapp for the program .
It ’ s unclear if that effort was what finally got him on moud , or if a desperate strategy he took paid off .
Knapp said that the jail required some kind of proof that he needed treatment : previous medical history or a positive urinalysis for opioids .
So , he said , he illegally obtained Suboxone in the jail and got tested while it was still in his system .
Knapp was finally able to get on the program in July — nearly six months after he was first denied .
Then-Senator Fred Akshar speaks during Senate session in Albany on April 30 , 2019 .
| NY Senate Photo THE INTENSE DEMAND for the medications has created an moud black market in the Broome County jail .
Incarcerated men are going to exceptional lengths to obtain medication that is supposed to be free and easily accessible .
Sometimes , that ’ s a contraband strip of Suboxone .
Other times , it ’ s the dried-up spit and remnants of Subutex from someone who cheeked their medication .
According to the Broome County Sheriff ’ s Office , they ’ ve caught 58 instances of medication diversion since the beginning of the year — “ but that only represents the instances we ’ ve been able to catch. ”
In the cases they don ’ t catch , “ people are bringing back half-chewed spit and letting the paste dry for a day , ” said Carney .
“ That ’ s an addiction right there in itself. ”
“ We shouldn ’ t have to go through that , taking toothpaste caps full of spit and just snorting other peoples ’ spit , ” he added .
“ While we ’ re asking for [ prescribed moud ] , being denied time after time after time. ”
If medical staff suspect someone is cheeking their medication — for example , staff see a bit of powder still floating around their mouth — it jeopardizes their treatment .
The first time , they have to speak with the provider for counseling ; the second , their medication may be cut .
The third time , they ’ re removed from the program altogether .
The Broome County Sheriff ’ s Office acknowledged the policy but denied it is punitive because corrections officers aren ’ t calling the shots .
“ Any changes to dosages are strictly made by the mat medical provider based on the health and safety of the individual , ” the spokesperson wrote .
Inflation Is Putting Food Out of Reach in New York Prisons Freddy Medina Others try to smuggle their medicine in .
In February , the Sheriff ’ s Office announced that it had intercepted a bundle of contraband containing marijuana , synthetic cannabis , tobacco , and about 167 strips of Suboxone , 13 of which were spliced with methamphetamine .
Akshar held it out as a victory for protecting the prisoners .
“ This investigation demonstrates how valuable our community members are in helping create a safer more secure environment , ” Akshar said via a press release .
“ Our team was able to once again thwart an effort to smuggle dangerous narcotics into our facility. ”
Most available research indicates that intercepting diverted medication harms more than it helps .
A 2018 survey of people using diverted buprenorphine ( the active ingredient in Suboxone and Subutex that prevents withdrawal and cravings ) found that nearly four out of five users said they were trying to avoid going into withdrawal .
Two-thirds said they were trying to remain abstinent .
And because buprenorphine has a ceiling effect that limits its depressive effects on respiration , there ’ s very little chance of overdosing on it .
In fact , one study found that access to non-prescribed buprenorphine reduces the risk of overdose .
Distributing the medications in jails and prisons is also remarkably safe .
In 2016 , Rhode Island established the country ’ s first statewide correctional moud program .
A study conducted one year in found that no one had been hurt by diverted medications .
“ Ultimately , the jail is a place of punishment , and I think that they view people who are incarcerated as bad people , ” said Kevin Revier , a professor of criminology at Arcadia University who did his doctoral thesis on the Broome County jail .
“ I thought it was interesting that the sheriff would be so excited about catching people smuggling in necessary medication. ”
“ I ’ m like a potential overdose waiting to happen. ”
—KEITH KEEFER Akshar ’ s office doesn ’
t see it that way .
“ mat is not smuggled into the jail .
mat is prescribed by a medical provider , ” read the sheriff ’ s written response .
“ The illegal contraband smuggled into the facility was not prescribed based on medical assessment , included substantial amounts of methamphetamine , marijuana and synthetic cannabis .
This was a criminal act with potentially fatal consequences. ”
“ mat is not smuggled into the jail .
mat is prescribed by a medical provider , ” read the sheriff ’ s written response .
“ The illegal contraband smuggled into the facility was not prescribed based on medical assessment , included substantial amounts of methamphetamine , marijuana and synthetic cannabis .
This was a criminal act with potentially fatal consequences. ”
“ mat is not smuggled into the jail .
mat is prescribed by a medical provider , ” read the sheriff ’ s written response .
“ The illegal contraband smuggled into the facility was not prescribed based on medical assessment , included substantial amounts of methamphetamine , marijuana and synthetic cannabis .
This was a criminal act with potentially fatal consequences. ”
“ mat is not smuggled into the jail .
mat is prescribed by a medical provider , ” read the sheriff ’ s written response .
“ The illegal contraband smuggled into the facility was not prescribed based on medical assessment , included substantial amounts of methamphetamine , marijuana and synthetic cannabis .
This was a criminal act with potentially fatal consequences. ”
Gemmell , the nyclu director , said , “ I hope to the extent that Broome County is investing time in putting press releases out about diverted medications , that they put equal effort into ensuring that those medications are available to the people whose lives depend on it. ”
WHEN THEY GET OUT , the men held in Broome County Corrections will be released into one of New York ’ s
communities hit hardest by the opioid crisis .
The county now has the fourth-highest rate of overdose death in the state .
Opioids have torn its social fabric to shreds .
Some of the men in the jail grew up together and watched one another follow the same trajectory .
It ’ s a recipe for disaster .
People recently released from incarceration have a dramatically higher risk of dying from an overdose .
After months of restricted access , their tolerance is often at an all-time low .
Upon reentry , they will have access to the most lethal drug supply in the history of the opioid epidemic , owing to the deluge of fentanyl and the tranquilizer xylazine .
As Overdose Deaths Climb in Albany County , Towns Rail Against Opioid Treatment Clinics Spencer Norris Jail moud programs have been shown to interrupt this pattern .
Back in Rhode Island , post-incarceration overdose deaths dropped 61 percent in the program ’ s first year alone .
Through his press representative , Akshar acknowledged that the jail has had some difficulties getting incarcerated people on moud , but he denied that there were significant delays .
“ I can say with full confidence that if someone enters our facility and the screening process shows they are in need of moud under our care , they are immediately put into the program. ”
Some of the men interviewed for this story said they believe Akshar is personally invested in the program ’ s success .
One man expressed his gratitude for jail staff , who resuscitated him after he overdosed in his cell .
( He still had to wait about two months to access the moud program . )
Akshar is facing an uphill battle .
For the better part of a decade , the Broome County jail has struggled to deliver medical care of any kind .
At least 10 people died in custody from 2011 to 2022 , often following medical neglect .
Under the previous sheriff , one man who was jailed for a drug court violation died after going 13 days without medical attention for an aggressive brain tumor .
The incidents have earned the facility the moniker “ Doom County Jail , ” according to Revier .
“ It ’ s a structural problem with jail medical delivery , ” said Andrew Pragacz , a professor in Binghamton University ’ s sociology department .
“ Good healthcare delivery is predicated on being able to advocate for yourself and being able to have some say in your care .
It ’ s a power relationship. ”
“ They just keep saying I got ta wait. ”
—JOSHUA COTTRILL Akshar said that his office is doing everything it can to get the men incarcerated in Broome County ready to leave .
He said the jail provides at least seven days of medication for anyone on the moud program upon release , even if they were cut off for diversion , and connects them with local providers on the way out .
But that only helps the folks who were able to get on the program in the first place .
Keith Keefer almost dreads the possibility of release .
He said he was prescribed methadone for pain while he was free — after a 2010 accident that shattered several bones in his torso — and taken off of it while incarcerated in Broome County .
When he spoke with New York Focus , he still hadn ’ t been able to get on the moud program , more than four months after he entered the jail .
Months off the methadone , Keefer ’ s cravings are intense .
He ’ s never used heroin or fentanyl , he said , but without the moud , he ’ s afraid of what he ’ ll do to stop the feeling .
“ I ’ m scared to death because I want to get high , ” Keefer told New York Focus .
“ I ’ m in so much pain , the urge to get high is tremendous. ”
He said his family moved to be closer to him — and make sure he doesn ’ t try to buy for the first time when he gets out .
“ I ’ m like a potential overdose waiting to happen , ” Keefer said .
“ I don ’ t want to end up with a drug problem that I didn ’ t come here with . ”
